# 1.2 A Short History of Dotenv

In 2011, Adam Wiggins published the [The Twelve-Factor App](https://12factor.net/config) methodology. In section 3, it made a cogent argument for storing config in the environment. That argument still holds today. Here's an excerpt.

> Apps sometimes store config as constants in the code. This is a violation of twelve-factor, which requires strict separation of config from code. Config varies substantially across deploys, code does not.
> 
> A litmus test for whether an app has all config correctly factored out of the code is whether the codebase could be made open source at any moment, without compromising any credentials.

The methodology went on to conclude:

> The twelve-factor app stores config in environment variables (often shortened to env vars or env). Env vars are easy to change between deploys without changing any code; unlike config files, there is little chance of them being checked into the code repo accidentally; and unlike custom config files, or other config mechanisms such as Java System Properties, they are a language- and OS-agnostic standard.

But the methodology did not provide an implementation to put your config into environment variables. This is when Dotenv enters history.

On [Jul 23, 2012](https://github.com/bkeepers/dotenv/commit/c3568a06b341f1182bd4e8b0d6e58a594cac7966), Brandon Keepers writes the first dotenv library for ruby.

On [Jul 5, 2013](https://github.com/motdotla/dotenv/commit/71dabbf27b699fcb7a04714709cecfc6e78892b9), Mot writes the dotenv nodejs library.

More libraries follow. Each implements the same basic pattern for developer secrets.

1. Place your secrets in a .env file
2. Require the library at the top of your code
3. On boot, the library loads the values from your .env file into your environment variables

Over time the pattern becomes a defacto standard adopted by millions of developers around the world across all languages and frameworks.
